His head was going in circles. He took a deep breath and remembered something that always soothed his nerves. He reached into his trusty pack, and removed a smallish tome, its vellum edges curled up from frequent review of its contents. It was titled 'Mastering Reality: The Basics' by Daerth Stonescriven. Ballan knew nothing about the author, but the book had come sarcastically recommended by another Venturer after a particularly stressful excursion into the Wilds. In whatever spirit his 'colleague' had meant it, the book had been an incredible boon to him.

Reading it always took his mind off things. He flipped open to near the start, and began reading.

"There were four well-known and agreed upon magical laws (Haruspex, 3e230): First, all magic is sourced from a wellspring of energy known as the Astral Sea, with the energy itself being called mana. Mana is raw energy, and its most notable property is the ease with which it changes form. (Haruspex 3e230)

Second, mana is naturally drawn towards the material plane, and constantly exerts pressure on the barrier between the Astral Sea and the material world. This barrier is called the Astral Tension (Nodgiver, 1e2035), and will be discussed later in this book. Like water, mana always follows the path of least resistance. However, unlike water, mana is not beholden to gravity or other aspects of physical reality. It does, however, have a natural tendency to adhere to itself, and so mana always moves towards the largest concentration of itself. (Boksplat, 3e814)

It is theorized that the reason mana so easily flows into the material world is because there is a highly concentrated source of it within the center of the world, but this has not been proven. (Stonescriven, 3e854)

Third, all living creatures have a dense core of mana within them. As such, when mana breaches, it tends to gravitate towards the nearest living creature. The mana from the Astral Sea making contact with an individual's internal mana allows them to tap into the extant mana from the Astral Sea. An individual's internal mana has a unique 'charge' or 'color' and, like a fingerprint, no two are exactly alike. (Hades,1e245) An individual's internal mana is considered 'charged'. Charged mana may also be referred to as aspected or ensouled. (Jargonax, 2e345)

Astral mana is, by default, not charged. As such, Astral mana, or other sources of uncharged mana (discussed later in this book), is occasionally referred to as uncharged, unaspected, or soulless. Besides hue and density, however, there are no other discernible differences between the two types of mana. When raw Astral mana comes into contact with an individual's internal mana, their charged mana diffuses into it, like ink into water. (Lorroakan, 1e2009) This provides the astral mana with a temporary 'charge' that corresponds to the 'charge' of the individual, allowing them to cast spells as though that mana were their very own.

Indeed, this means all spellcasting, thaumaturgy, magery, and other modes of mancy are all based upon the concept that mortals are capable of manipulating their soul. Aspecting astral mana so that it is aligned with your own is the only way to create magic without expending your life force. Fortunately, mana is abundant and seemingly inexhaustible, so no one ever need exhaust their life for this purpose. (Stonescriven, 3e854)

Mana being charged or uncharged does not affect its ability to produce magical effects, but it does affect one's finesse - for weal or woe. Someone using their own aspected mana is going to have a much easier time casting spells, then if that same person were to try and use someone else's aspected mana. Animancy - the art of using your soul or the souls of others to fuel magic - is incredibly dangerous and often incredibly evil. (Dekarios, 3e678)

This is because charged mana can only be created when creatures are born according to the laws of nature. As such, an individual's aspected mana is finite - using the soul shortens the life of whoever it belongs to. It may even kill them. Woe betide those who use the souls of others for their own ends. Woe betide those who burn their soul to cross death's threshold all the faster. (Mortarch Ingressia, 4e248)

As for the fourth and final law: Every act of magic must expend an equal magnitude of mana. It became expedient to define how much mana, exactly, is being expended on any one given spell. It has been widely agreed upon (Nodgiver, 1e2035)(Manson, 3e452)(Illumariel, 2e54) that a single 'drop' of mana is the amount of mana it takes to boil one gram of water, if that mana was used to heat the water using a direct conduction spell. This makes a single drop of mana - comparably - the most energy-rich substance in existence. Even so, as a spell's complexity, power, radius, or any other measurable variable, increases, so too does the requisite amount of mana needed increase. In some cases, the increase in mana can be exponential (O2^n). (Volgrim, 3e638)

Some spells use veritable floods of mana during their casting, but maintaining control of such a flood requires skill, confidence, and - most importantly - willpower. Many of the most powerful spells ever cast were done with the combined skills of many archmages, working in tandem to control the flow of mana together. Through such collaboration..."

...Not that anyone had seen collaboration like that in decades.

Ballan sighed. He was studious, sure, but when it came to practically applying what he knew... It just slipped through his fingers. How was he supposed to invent Chronomancy? Even the strange paracausal reassurance that he would succeed, as demonstrated by his future self being able to contact Boots in the first place, did little to ease his anxiety on the matter. Time was weird. Maybe that version of him was from a different spatial reality entirely. Or maybe he created a paradox and now he would never discover time magic because he knew he was supposed to, and that knowledge prevented him from being able to!